docs: add guide to install CKF + Canonical Identity Platform Terraform solution (#59)
canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation: docs/how-to/install/install-terraform-identity.rst

Reviewer: praise: very helpful notes inserted among the different steps

.. _install_terraform_identity:

Install with Canonical Identity Platform using Terraform
========================================================

This guide describes how to install Charmed Kubeflow (CKF) integrated with the
`Canonical Identity Platform <https://charmhub.io/topics/canonical-identity-platform>`_ using `Terraform`_.

> This solution runs CKF on the `Istio Ambient Mesh`_ and wires it to the Canonical Identity Platform

Reviewer 2: nitpick: Maybe use a more fitting word than "wire", "integrate" or "connect"
```suggestion
This solution runs CKF on the `Istio Ambient Mesh`_ and integrates it with the Canonical Identity Platform
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

(Hydra, Kratos and the Login UI) so that authentication is handled by the Identity Platform.

.. note::

   This integration is available in Istio ambient mode only.

The deployment spans four `Juju models <https://juju.is/docs/juju/model>`_:

* ``istio-system``: the Istio ambient control plane (``istio-k8s``).
* ``iam``: the Canonical Identity Platform bundle (Hydra, Kratos and the Login UI).
* ``iam-core``: the Identity Platform dependencies (``postgresql-k8s``, ``traefik`` and ``self-signed-certificates``).
* ``kubeflow``: the CKF applications, the two ambient ingress gateways (UI and machine-to-machine) and the Identity Platform authentication charms.

.. TODO: Update this guide once the ``feat/iam-integration`` branch of charmed-kubeflow-solutions is merged, including the repository URL, branch and module path.

---------------------
Requirements
---------------------

> * A K8s cluster that:

Reviewer 2: nitpick: Since this is the first mention, use the full word since users may not be familiar with the numeronym
```suggestion
* A Kubernetes (K8s) cluster that:
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

>   * is a version supported by Charmed Kubeflow (see :ref:`Supported versions <supported_kubeflow_versions>`), with a default `storage class <https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/>`_ configured.

Reviewer 2: nitpick: Wording
```suggestion
  * uses a version supported by Charmed Kubeflow (see :ref:`Supported versions <supported_kubeflow_versions>`), with a default `storage class <https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/>`_ configured.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

  * has a load balancer provider, so that the ingress gateways and the Identity Platform can be exposed through ``LoadBalancer`` services. For example, `MetalLB <https://metallb.io/>`_ on `MicroK8s`_.
  * meets the `Istio platform prerequisites`_ for the ambient mesh.
* `Terraform CLI <https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli>`_. You can install it using the `snap`_.
* `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/>`_ configured to access your cluster.

---------------------
Bootstrap Juju
---------------------

CKF is deployed to Kubernetes with Juju.

> Before deployment, Juju must be bootstrapped to the K8s cluster.

Reviewer 2: nitpick: More exact wording
```suggestion
Before deployment, a Juju controller must be bootstrapped to the K8s cluster.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

See `Get started with Juju <https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/tutorial/>`_ for more details.

.. note::

   Check :ref:`Supported versions <supported_kubeflow_versions>` for version compatibility between CKF, Juju and K8s.

-------------------------------------
Deploy CKF with the Identity Platform
-------------------------------------

Deploy the solution as follows:

> 1. Clone the repository and change directory to the solution module:

Reviewer 2: nitpick: Specify what repository we are referring to
```suggestion
1. Clone the `charmed-kubeflow-solutions` repository and change directory to the solution module:
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-solutions
   cd charmed-kubeflow-solutions

>    git checkout feat/iam-integration

Reviewer 2: thought: We should change this after merging

Author: Agree. There's already a `TODO` at the top of the guide to update the repository URL, branch, and module path once `feat/iam-integration` merges.

   cd terraform-refactoring/tests/kubeflow-ambient-iam

2. Initialise Terraform. The following command downloads all the required `Terraform modules <https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules>`_ and installs the Terraform `Juju provider <https://registry.terraform.io/providers/juju/juju/latest/docs>`_:

.. code-block:: bash

   terraform init

> 3. Prepare a Profile Management Repository (PMR).

Reviewer 2: nitpick: Mandela effect spotted, this actually stands for *Profile Management Representation*, see the [github-profiles-automator](https://github.com/canonical/github-profiles-automator) readme
```suggestion
3. Prepare a Profile Management Representation (PMR) in a Git repository.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

> 3. Prepare a Profile Management Repository (PMR).

Reviewer 2: suggestion(non-blocking): It seems that this part should be moved further below, after the "Create a user" section. The reasoning behind this is that the developer has to know the name of the owner before they properly update the `pmr.yaml`. So the order should be:
- Create Kratos user
- Update PMR to define a new Profile (user's choice for a name), using the Kratos user as the owner

Author: Not sure I agree with this order, let's discuss async to resolve this quicker.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/761685e36b2aa7f5dfb41d765c0976a23347636f

> The ``github-profiles-automator`` charm keeps the Kubeflow profiles in sync with a ``pmr.yaml`` file stored in a GitHub repository.

Reviewer 2: suggestion(non-blocking): The file path is configurable and can be different than `pmr.yaml`, maybe we can mention it more elegantly:
```suggestion
The ``github-profiles-automator`` charm keeps the Kubeflow profiles in sync with a YAML file stored in a GitHub repository.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

> Create a repository (for example, ``https://github.com/example-org/kubeflow-pmr``) containing a ``pmr.yaml`` file at its root, such as:

Reviewer 2: suggestion(non-blocking): Same as before regarding the `pmr.yaml`. Just mention at the end to configure the charm with the file name

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

The command above:

* Creates four Juju models: ``istio-system``, ``iam``, ``iam-core`` and ``kubeflow``.
* Deploys the Istio ambient control plane into ``istio-system``.
* Deploys the Canonical Identity Platform bundle into ``iam`` and its dependencies (including ``traefik``) into ``iam-core``.
* Deploys CKF with the two ambient ingress gateways and the Identity Platform authentication charms into ``kubeflow``.
* Deploys the ``github-profiles-automator`` charm, which syncs Kubeflow profiles from your PMR repository.
* Sets the external hostname on the UI gateway (``ui.kubeflow.com``), the machine-to-machine gateway (``api.kubeflow.com``) and the Identity Platform ingress (``auth.kubeflow.com``).

See `kubeflow-ambient-iam deployment <https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-solutions/blob/feat/iam-integration/terraform-refactoring/tests/kubeflow-ambient-iam/README.md>`_ for more details.

6. Verify all charms are in ``active`` status by monitoring the Juju models:

.. code-block:: bash

   juju status -m istio-system --watch 1s
   juju status -m iam --watch 1s
   juju status -m iam-core --watch 1s
   juju status -m kubeflow --watch 1s

.. note::

>    This may take up to some minutes, depending on the cluster's node specifications.

Reviewer 2: nitpick: Wording, also the second part is not very useful/actionable
```suggestion
   Deployment may take several minutes to complete, depending on the cluster's node specifications.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

For these hostnames to resolve, you need to configure DNS in two places:

* **In-cluster DNS (CoreDNS)**, so that in-cluster workloads (for example, the authentication redirects between the gateways and the Identity Platform) can resolve the hostnames.
* **Host DNS**, so that the machine running your browser (the cluster host itself or a separate workstation) can reach the gateways.

1. Get the ``LoadBalancer`` IP addresses of the gateways and the Identity Platform ingress:

.. code-block:: bash

   UI_IP=$(kubectl -n kubeflow get svc istio-ingress-k8s-ui-istio \
       -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
   API_IP=$(kubectl -n kubeflow get svc istio-ingress-k8s-m2m-istio \
       -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
   AUTH_IP=$(kubectl -n iam-core get svc traefik-lb \
       -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
   echo "UI   ui.kubeflow.com   -> $UI_IP"
   echo "API  api.kubeflow.com  -> $API_IP"
   echo "AUTH auth.kubeflow.com -> $AUTH_IP"

Configure in-cluster DNS (CoreDNS)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

2. Find the name of the CoreDNS ``ConfigMap`` in your cluster:

.. code-block:: bash

>    kubectl -n kube-system get configmap | grep -i coredns

Reviewer 2: thought: Maybe assign this to a variable that can be used below?

Author: Good call, done in 373c4a1

.. code-block:: bash

   kubectl -n kube-system edit configmap ck-dns-coredns

Add a ``hosts`` block inside the ``.:53 { ... }`` server block, just before the ``kubernetes`` plugin line, using the IP addresses from step 1:

.. code-block:: text

   hosts {
       <UI_IP>   ui.kubeflow.com
       <API_IP>  api.kubeflow.com
       <AUTH_IP> auth.kubeflow.com
       fallthrough
   }

.. note::

   The ``fallthrough`` directive ensures that any query not matching these hostnames is still resolved by the rest of the CoreDNS configuration.

4. Restart CoreDNS to apply the change (replace ``ck-dns-coredns`` with the matching deployment name if it differs, for example ``coredns`` on MicroK8s):

.. code-block:: bash

   kubectl -n kube-system rollout restart deployment ck-dns-coredns

Configure host DNS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

5. On the machine where you access the CKF dashboard from a browser, add the hostnames to ``/etc/hosts`` using the IP addresses from step 1:

.. code-block:: bash

   echo "$UI_IP ui.kubeflow.com"     | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts
   echo "$API_IP api.kubeflow.com"   | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts

>    echo "$AUTH_IP auth.kubeflow.com" | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts

Reviewer 2: question: Requiring users to edit `/etc/hosts` seems a bit permanent, is there a way to do it temporarily (until the machine is rebooted)? If yes, let's mention that, with a note on how to do it permanently like we do here

Author: `hosts` is the standard host-side resolution method and its entries persist until removed, why would someone want to do it temporarily? They can simply remove the lines when no longer needed. Do you think I should add a note for that? It's quite intuitive for sys admins IMHO.

Reviewer 2: The guide is directed to system administrators, so I would say it's fine

.. _create_user_identity:

---------------------
Create a user
---------------------

The ``github-profiles-automator`` charm creates the Kubeflow profiles defined in your ``pmr.yaml`` file automatically.
Each profile is owned by a user whose identity is provided by the Canonical Identity Platform.
To log in and own a profile, create a matching user in Kratos.

1. Create a Kratos user whose username matches the ``owner.name`` of a profile in your ``pmr.yaml`` file, using the Kratos `create-admin-account <https://charmhub.io/kratos/actions#create-admin-account>`_ action:

.. code-block:: bash

   juju run -m iam kratos/0 create-admin-account \
      username=user1 \
      email=user1@example.com

.. note::

>    The ``owner.name`` in ``pmr.yaml`` maps to the Kratos ``username``, so both must be identical (for example, ``user1``).

Reviewer 2: nitpick: wording
```suggestion
   The ``owner.name`` in ``pmr.yaml`` maps to the Kratos ``username``, so they must be identical (for example, ``user1``).
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

The action output includes a link that the user opens to set their account password.

2. Confirm that the profile defined in your ``pmr.yaml`` file has been created:

.. code-block:: bash

   kubectl get profiles

See :ref:`Manage profiles <manage_profiles>` for more details on managing profiles and the ``pmr.yaml`` format.

---------------------
Access CKF dashboard
---------------------

Once DNS is configured, you can access the CKF dashboard at ``https://ui.kubeflow.com``.
You are redirected to the Canonical Identity Platform to authenticate with the user you created.

The gateways and the Identity Platform are served with certificates issued by the ``self-signed-certificates`` charm by default.

> Because these certificates are not signed by a trusted certificate authority (CA), your browser warns that the connection is not trusted.

Reviewer 2: nitpick: Wording, I'm not 100% sure the browser will always complain, but feel free to ignore this
```suggestion
Because these certificates are not signed by a trusted certificate authority (CA), your browser may warn that the connection is not trusted.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/fb3b6ce8769ab711fb98927b1225d3ec7656c440

* ``iam``: the Canonical Identity Platform bundle (Hydra, Kratos and the Login UI).
* ``iam-core``: the Identity Platform dependencies (``postgresql-k8s``, ``traefik`` and ``self-signed-certificates``).
* ``kubeflow``: the CKF applications, the two ambient ingress gateways (UI and machine-to-machine) and the Identity Platform authentication charms.

.. TODO: Update this guide once the ``feat/iam-integration`` branch of charmed-kubeflow-solutions is merged, including the repository URL, branch and module path.

---------------------
Requirements
---------------------

* A K8s cluster version supported by Charmed Kubeflow (see :ref:`Supported versions <supported_kubeflow_versions>`) with a default `storage class <https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/>`_ configured.
* A load balancer provider on the cluster, so that the ingress gateways and the Identity Platform can be exposed through ``LoadBalancer`` services. For example, `MetalLB <https://metallb.io/>`_ on `MicroK8s`_.
* A K8s cluster that meets the `Istio platform prerequisites`_ for the ambient mesh.
* `Terraform CLI <https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli>`_. You can install it using the `snap`_.

> * `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/>`_ configured to access your cluster.

Reviewer: nitpick: we could group both of the points about the K8s cluster under a single one as subpoints

Author: de26c6f

---------------------
Bootstrap Juju
---------------------

CKF is deployed to Kubernetes with Juju.
Before deployment, Juju must be bootstrapped to the K8s cluster.
See `Get started with Juju <https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/tutorial/>`_ for more details.

.. note::

   Check :ref:`Supported versions <supported_kubeflow_versions>` for version compatibility between CKF, Juju and K8s.

-------------------------------------
Deploy CKF with the Identity Platform
-------------------------------------

Deploy the solution as follows:

1. Clone the repository and change directory to the solution module:

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-solutions
   cd charmed-kubeflow-solutions
   git checkout feat/iam-integration
   cd terraform-refactoring/tests/kubeflow-ambient-iam

2. Initialise Terraform. The following command downloads all the required `Terraform modules <https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules>`_ and installs the Terraform `Juju provider <https://registry.terraform.io/providers/juju/juju/latest/docs>`_:

.. code-block:: bash

   terraform init

3. Prepare a Profile Management Repository (PMR).

> The ``github-profiles-automator`` charm keeps the Kubeflow profiles in sync with a ``pmr.yaml`` file stored in a GitHub repository.

Reviewer: thought: shall we capitalize "Profile"/"Profiles", [as they do upstream](https://www.kubeflow.org/docs/components/central-dash/profiles/)? I see we don't always do so in our docs, though...

Author: I kept lowercase 'profile(s)' to stay consistent with our existing `Manage profiles` guide, which this page links to. Happy to switch both docs to the upstream capitalization in a separate pass if we want to standardize on it.

Reviewer: No need!

Reviewer 2: Upstream is not consistent in how they capitalize, you can see that normal paragraphs use lower case. Let's stick to lowercase

Create a repository (for example, ``https://github.com/example-org/kubeflow-pmr``) containing a ``pmr.yaml`` file at its root, such as:

.. code-block:: yaml

   profiles:

>    - name: ml-engineering

Reviewer: suggestion (non-blocking): let's explain that the Profile's name by itself is arbitrary

Author: 2d0b231

Reviewer 2: I would prefer more user-oriented wording, e.g. "You can choose any name for the Profile"

See `kubeflow-ambient-iam deployment <https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-solutions/blob/feat/iam-integration/terraform-refactoring/tests/kubeflow-ambient-iam/README.md>`_ for more details.

7. Verify all charms are in ``active`` status by monitoring the Juju models:

.. code-block:: bash

   juju status -m istio-system --watch 1s
   juju status -m iam --watch 1s
   juju status -m iam-core --watch 1s
   juju status -m kubeflow --watch 1s

.. note::

   This may take up to some minutes, depending on the cluster's node specifications.

.. _configure_dns_identity:

--------------------------------------
Configure DNS for the ingress gateways
--------------------------------------

The ingress gateways and the Identity Platform are exposed through ``LoadBalancer`` services using the hostnames you configured during deployment.
For these hostnames to resolve, you need to configure DNS in two places:

* **In-cluster DNS (CoreDNS)**, so that in-cluster workloads (for example, the authentication redirects between the gateways and the Identity Platform) can resolve the hostnames.

> * **Host DNS**, so that your browser can reach the gateways.

Reviewer: suggestion (non-blocking): browser is ambiguous, based on whether they run the browser on the same host as the cluster or the cluster is remote to their machine

Author: Good feedback, updated in https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/pull/59/commits/e33aa4e309c4335ee1dfe2ec18a71cf739db0de3

1. Get the ``LoadBalancer`` IP addresses of the gateways and the Identity Platform ingress:

.. code-block:: bash

   UI_IP=$(kubectl -n kubeflow get svc istio-ingress-k8s-ui-istio \
       -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
   API_IP=$(kubectl -n kubeflow get svc istio-ingress-k8s-m2m-istio \
       -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
   AUTH_IP=$(kubectl -n iam-core get svc traefik-lb \
       -o jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
   echo "UI   ui.kubeflow.com   -> $UI_IP"
   echo "API  api.kubeflow.com  -> $API_IP"

>    echo "AUTH auth.kubeflow.com -> $AUTH_IP"

Reviewer: suggestion (non-blocking): let's either make them reuse the same variables they defined above for hostnames or not make them define them at all and hardcode those hostnames in the Terraform command as well

Author: Done in 3543867, dropped the separate variable step and hardcoded the example hostnames directly in the terraform apply command, since the DNS steps run later (likely in a fresh shell), so the `*_IP` variables stay local to their snippet while hostnames are just literals.

Reviewer: Perfect!

Configure in-cluster DNS (CoreDNS)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

2. Find the name of the CoreDNS ``ConfigMap`` in your cluster:

.. code-block:: bash

   kubectl -n kube-system get configmap | grep -i coredns

The name depends on your K8s distribution:

* On MicroK8s, it is ``coredns``.
* On Canonical Kubernetes, it is ``ck-dns-coredns``.

> 3. Edit the CoreDNS ``ConfigMap`` (replace ``coredns`` with the name found above):

Reviewer: suggestion (non-blocking): being Canonical K8s the new standard, shall we use its ConfigMap as the name in the examples (despite your note)?

Author: 5444a66

.. code-block:: bash

   kubectl -n kube-system edit configmap coredns

Add a ``hosts`` block inside the ``.:53 { ... }`` server block, just before the ``kubernetes`` plugin line, using the IP addresses from step 1:

.. code-block:: text

   hosts {
       <UI_IP>   ui.kubeflow.com
       <API_IP>  api.kubeflow.com

>        <AUTH_IP> auth.kubeflow.com

Reviewer: suggestion (non-blocking): like above, if we decide to make them reuse the same variables for the hostnames

Author: addressed in https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/commit/3543867aeadb19f8d75a43a8203f19ec65638395, same as above

       fallthrough
   }

.. note::

   The ``fallthrough`` directive ensures that any query not matching these hostnames is still resolved by the rest of the CoreDNS configuration.

4. Restart CoreDNS to apply the change (replace ``coredns`` with the matching deployment name, for example ``ck-dns-coredns`` on Canonical Kubernetes):

.. code-block:: bash

   kubectl -n kube-system rollout restart deployment coredns

Configure host DNS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

5. On the machine where you access the CKF dashboard from a browser, add the hostnames to ``/etc/hosts`` using the IP addresses from step 1:

.. code-block:: bash

   echo "$UI_IP ui.kubeflow.com"     | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts
   echo "$API_IP api.kubeflow.com"   | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts

>    echo "$AUTH_IP auth.kubeflow.com" | sudo tee -a /etc/hosts

Reviewer: suggestion (non-blocking): as above, if we dedice to make them reuse the same variables for hostnames

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-documentation/commit/3543867aeadb19f8d75a43a8203f19ec65638395

* Deploys the ``github-profiles-automator`` charm, which syncs Kubeflow profiles from your PMR repository.
* Sets the external hostname on the UI gateway (``ui.kubeflow.com``), the machine-to-machine gateway (``api.kubeflow.com``) and the Identity Platform ingress (``auth.kubeflow.com``).

> See `kubeflow-ambient-iam deployment <http://github.com/canonical/charmed-kubeflow-solutions/blob/main/terraform/tests/kubeflow-ambient-iam/README.md>`_ for more details.

Reviewer: question: why HTTP instead of HTTPS?

Author: not sure when I copied it was like that :D

Author: updated
